Native query planner GA - docs and changelog (#6424)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/query-planning/native-query-planner.mdx

  - /router/executing-operations/native-query-planner
---

Learn about the Rust-native query planner in GraphOS Router. The planner is GA as of v1.59.0.

## Background about query planner implementations

In v1.49.0 the router introduced a [query planner](/graphos/routing/about-router#query-planning) implemented natively in Rust. This native query planner improves the overall performance and resource utilization of query planning. It exists alongside the legacy JavaScript implementation that uses the V8 JavaScript engine, and it will eventually replace the legacy implementation.

> As of v1.59.0, the native query planner is the default planner in the router. As part of this, Deno, and by extension v8, are no longer intialised at router startup. The legacy implementation is deprecated, but it is still possible to opt-in to legacy query planner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of v1.59.0, the native query planner is the default planner in the router. As part of this, Deno, and by extension v8, are no longer intialised at router startup. The legacy implementation is deprecated, but it is still possible to opt-in to legacy query planner.

The native query planner supports Federation v2 supergraphs. If you are using Federation v1 today, see our [migration guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/migration/to-federation-version-2) on how to update your composition build step and subgraph changes are typically not needed.
```

Reviewer: Noticed that this is actually mentioned below

> As of v1.59.0, the native query planner is the default planner in the router. As part of this, Deno, and by extension v8, are no longer intialised at router startup. The legacy implementation is deprecated, but it is still possible to opt-in to legacy query planner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of v1.59.0, the native query planner is the default planner in the router. As part of this, Deno, and by extension v8, are no longer initialized at router startup. The legacy implementation is deprecated, but it is still possible to configure the router to run with the legacy query planner.
```

Author: ooops i need to set up an american spell checker for my .md files 😅
